---
layout: page
title: Chapter 5 Resources
---
<div class="chapterReference" style="border: 1px solid #ccc; padding: 12px 14px; background-color: #efefef; margin:30px 0;">
Materials accompanying <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/chapters/05/" target="_blank"> "Bringing Harlem to the Schools: Langston Hughes’s The First Book of Negroes and Crafting a Juvenile Readership"</a> by Jonna Perrillo
</div>

[Photograph of Langston Hughes (1936)](https://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3529799){:target="_blank"}

>> Langston Hughes was an important writer and figure of the Harlem Renaissance. He published extensively, including a number of works for Black children, including *The First Book of Negroes.* This photograph was taken by Carl Van Vechten in 1936.

---

[Association for the Study of African American Life and History, "Black History Themes"](https://asalh.org/black-history-themes/){:target="_blank"}

>> In 1926, Carter G. Woodson and the Association for the Study of African American Life and History founded the first Negro History Week (which later became Black History Month). Since 1928, each year’s commemoration has included a theme, which are all listed on the Association’s website.

---

[*We Build Together: A Reader's Guide to Negro Life and Literature for Elementary and High School* (1967)](https://digitalcollections.nypl.org/items/7f9eeaf0-ec86-0134-ee46-096986f5ac8f){:target="_blank"}

>> Charlemae Rollins was a Black librarian in Chicago, where she was the head librarian of the children’s department and a key figure in advancing Black children’s literature. In 1941, she published *We Build Together,* a bibliographic guide to books for Black children, which was updated again in this edition from 1967.

---

“Voices of the Past: The Inclusion of Black History at Wadleigh” [link coming soon]

>> Select "Voices of the Past" from the Harlem Education History Project exhibit page. This exhibit by Melanie Levine explores how Black history was made part of the curriculum at Wadleigh Junior High School in the 1970s and 1980s. Levine shows how teachers and students work to include Black history in social studies classes, English readings, and school-wide events. Their consideration of what and how to teach these subjects built on the work of Langston Hughes and other Black writers and educators.

---

Tracy McCracken Oral History (2019) [link coming soon]

>> Select Tracy McCracken's oral history from the Harlem Education History Project. Tracy McCracken attended the Modern School (a Black private school explored in [chapter 1](https://harlemeducationhistory.library.columbia.edu/book/chapters/01/) in the 1970s and early 1980s. In her oral history she discusses the presence and importance of Black history in her schooling.

---

[“Framing Culturally Responsive Education,” pages 14-23 of *Culturally Responsive Education: A Primer for Policy and Practice* (2017)](https://research.steinhardt.nyu.edu/scmsAdmin/media/users/atn293/pdf/CRE_Brief_2017_PrintBooklet_170817.pdf){:target="_blank"}

>> This document is a section of a report by Evan Johnston, Pamela D’Andrea Montalbano, and David E. Kirkland of New York University’s Metropolitan Center for Research on Equity and the Transformation of Schools. It defines and traces recent trends in culturally responsive teaching practices, which readers may compare to the work of Langston Hughes discussed in chapter 5 (see question 1 below). Key researchers cited include Gloria Ladson-Billings and Django Paris and H. Samy Alim.

---

### Discussion Questions

1. Many educators today are working to create culturally sustaining and culturally responsive education. [Here is one document](http://www.nysed.gov/common/nysed/files/programs/crs/culturally-responsive-sustaining-education-framework.pdf){:target="_blank"} describing their goals (read the "vision" and "executive summary," pages 8-15). How are these goals similar to or different from Langston Hughes' effort in The First Book of Negroes?

2. In chapter 5, author Jonna Perrillo notes the power that school librarians and teachers had to control the texts students had access to. Black teachers and members of the progressive Teachers Union were especially instrumental in sharing The First Book with the public. Drawing on your own educational experience, how can educators help more students learn about Black history and literature today?
